---
layout: main-no-sidebar
title: "Data Management Technology for Interactive Vis"
---

# Abstract

In the last two decades, interactive visualization and analysis have
become a central tool in data-driven decision making. Concurrently to
the contributions in data visualization, the data management community
has spent significant effort in developing technology that directly
benefits interactive analysis. We contribute a systematic review of
this adjacent field, and highlight a number of techniques and
principles we believe to be underappreciated in visualization
work. We seek to bring attention to: *materialized views*, 
*approximate query processing*, *user modeling and query prediction*, 
*multi-query optimization*, *provenance techniques*, and *indexing techniques*.

By a combination of use cases and taxonomies from the visualization
literature, we show that these ideas can positively change how we
visualization designers build our systems, while also highlighting
research gaps, where future work is necessary.

## Article

A Structured Review of Data Management Technology for Interactive Visualization and Analysis. [Leilani Battle](https://www.cs.umd.edu/~leilani/bio.html) and [Carlos Scheidegger](https://cscheid.net). IEEE TVCG (VIS 2020), to appear. [pdf](/papers/infovis_2020_dbsurvey.pdf)

## Methodology and Materials

We conducted a systematic literature review of six different venues
going back to at least 2000 (three data management venues: ICDE,
SIGMOD and VLDB and three visualization venues: IEEE VIS, ACM CHI, and
EuroVis).

We categorized the results we obtained by coding the publications we
found along two axes. The first axis characterizes the interaction
techniques which are applicable for the techniques proposed; we
obtained the codes themselves from combining two well-regarded task
taxonomies from the literature. The second axis characterizes the kind
of technical work, which we obtained by a combination of the keywords
used by the publications and the our experience as authors of working
in the intersection of the data management and visualization fields.

The result of this methodology is a bibliography annotated with
*interaction codes* --- `encode`, `select`, `navigate`, `arrange`,
`change`, `filter`, `aggregate`, `annotate`, `derive` and `record` ---
as well as *implementation codes* --- `materialized-view`, `aqp` (for
"approximate query processing"), `mqo` (for "multi-query
optimization"), `user-modeling`, and `index` (for "indexing-based
techniques").  In addition, as we have worked thrhough the identified
articles, we have collected all other surveys under a separate
category (coded as `survey`).

The resulting bibliography has 104 articles and is available [as a
BibTeX file](vis-db.bib).

# Funding

Prof. Battle is partially funded by NSF grant IIS-1850115, [CRII: CHS: Modeling Analysis Behavior to Support Interactive Exploration of Massive Datasets](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1850115).

Prof. Scheidegger is partially funded by NSF grant IIS-1815238, [III: Small: An end-to-end pipeline for interactive visual analysis of big data](../).

## Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported or partially supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number 1815238, project titled "III: Small: An end-to-end pipeline for interactive visual analysis of big data", and under Grant Number 1850115, project titled "CRII: CHS: Modeling Analysis Behavior to Support Interactive Exploration of Massive Datasets".

Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this project are those of author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

Web page last update: 2020-09-11.

